UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
Agricultural Marketing Service
Livestock and Seed Program
Washington, DC 20250

INSTITUTIONAL MEAT PURCHASE SPECIFICATIONS

FOR VARIETY MEATS AND EDIBLE BY-PRODUCTS SERIES 700 INTERIM
APPROVED BY USDA
EFFECTIVE DATE - June 1, 1993

INSTITUTIONAL MEAT PURCHASE SPECIFICATIONS
FOR VARIETY MEATS AND EDIBLE BY-PRODUCTS SERIES 700
The United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) through its Agricultural Marketing Service (AMS) develops and maintains the Institutional Meat Purchase Specifications (IMPS) for meat and meat products. The complete IMPS series includes the following ten documents:
General Requirements Fresh Beef......................................................................................................... Series 100 Fresh Lamb and Mutton ................................................................................... Series 200 Fresh Veal and Calf ........................................................................................... Series 300 Fresh Pork ......................................................................................................... Series 400 Cured, Cured & Smoked, & Fully Cooked Pork Products ............................. Series 500 Cured, Dried, and Smoked Beef Products ...................................................... Series 600 Variety Meats and Edible By-Products............................................................. Series 700 Sausage Products ............................................................................................... Series 800 Quality Assurance Provisions
These specifications are recommended for use in any meat product procuring activity. For assurance that procured items comply with these detailed requirements, the USDA, through its Meat Grading and Certification Branch, provides a voluntary Meat Certification Service. For labeling purposes, only product Certified by the Meat Grading and Certification Branch (MGCB) may contain the letters "IMPS" on the product label. Purchasers desiring this service should contact:
USDA, AMS, Livestock and Seed Program Meat Grading and Certification Branch Stop 0248, Room 2628 S-Bldg 1400 Independence Ave. SW Washington DC 20250-0248
For any assistance regarding these documents and for additional copies, please contact:
USDA, AMS, Livestock and Seed Program Standardization Branch Stop 0254, Room 2628 S-Bldg 1400 Independence Ave. SW Washington, DC 20250-0254

INDEX OF VARIETY MEATS AND EDIBLE BY-PRODUCTS SERIES - 700

ITEM NO. 701 702 703 704 705 707 708 710 713 715 716 717 720 721 722
723 724 725
726 727 728 729 731 732

ITEM
BEEF LIVER BEEF LIVER, SLICED (FROZEN) BEEF LIVER, PORTION-CUT (FROZEN) CALF LIVER CALF LIVER, SLICED (FROZEN) VEAL LIVER VEAL LIVER, SLICED (FROZEN) PORK LIVER LAMB LIVER VEAL SWEETBREADS BEEF TONGUE, SHORT CUT TONGUE, SWISS CUT BEEF HEART, TRIMMED BEEF OXTAIL, TRIMMED BEEF KIDNEY LAMB KIDNEY PORK KIDNEY CHEEK MEAT HEAD MEAT BEEF BRAINS LAMB BRAINS PORK BRAINS BEEF TRIPE, SCALDED, BLEACHED (DENUDED) BEEF TRIPE, HONEYCOMB, BLEACHED PORK CHITTERLINGS PORK STOMACH (MAWS), SCALDED EDIBLE TALLOW LARD (EDIBLE)

WEIGHT RANGE A

WEIGHT RANGE B

UNDER 13 LBS.

13 -16

5, 6 SLICES PER POUND

3, 4 SLICES PER POUND

6, 7 SLICES PER POUND

4, 5 SLICES PER POUND

UNDER 6.5 POUNDS

6.5 - 8.5 POUNDS

6, 7 SLICES PER POUND

7, 8 SLICES PER POUND

UNDER 3 POUNDS

3 TO 5 POUNDS

7, 8 SLICES PER POUND

5, 6 SLICES PER POUND

5 POUNDS AND DOWN

1.5 POUNDS AND DOWN

6 OUNCES AND DOWN

UNDER 3 POUNDS

3 TO 5 POUNDS

UNDER 1 POUND

2 TO 4 POUNDS

4 POUNDS AND DOWN

2 POUNDS AND DOWN

2 POUNDS AND DOWN

0.5 POUND AND DOWN

0.5 POUND AND DOWN

AS SPECIFIED BY THE PURCHASER

AS SPECIFIED BY THE PURCHASER

1 POUND AND DOWN

UNDER 3 OUNCES

3 TO 5 OUNCES

UNDER 5 OUNCES

5 TO 10 OUNCES

AS SPECIFIED BY THE PURCHASER

AS SPECIFIED BY THE PURCHASER

AS SPECIFIED BY THE PURCHASER

5 POUND CONTAINERS

10 POUND CONTAINERS

5 POUND CONTAINERS

10 POUND CONTAINERS

3

NOTE: Because it is impractical to list all of the weight ranges for edible by-products that a purchaser may request, those included in this table are suggested weight ranges only. Purchasers may specify any alternative weight range desired.

I. ORDERING DATA TO BE SPECIFIED BY THE PURCHASER

STATE OF REFRIGERATION - See IMPS General Requirements.
A - CHILLED - 280F to 400F (-2.20C to 50C) B - FROZEN - 00F or lower (-17.80C)

PORTION WEIGHT AND THICKNESS TOLERANCES 1/

The purchaser shall specify the portion weight and/or thickness desired. For assistance in specifying a portion weight, see weight range tables. When both weight and thickness are specified, it is recommended that those requirements be limited to items that are mechanically pressed and/or sliced.

PORTION THICKNESS TOLERANCES 1/

Specified Thickness

Thickness Tolerance

Thickness Uniformity

1 inch (25 mm) or less

+/- 3/16 inch (5 mm)

3/16 inch (5 mm)

more than 1 inch (25 mm)

+/- 1/4 inch (6 mm)

1/4 inch (6 mm)

PORTION WEIGHT TOLERANCES 1/

Specified Weight

Weight Tolerance

Thickness Uniformity

Less than 6.0 ounces (170 g)

+/- 1/4 oz (7 g)

3/16 inch (5 mm)

6.0 ounces

+/- 1/2 oz (14 g)

(170 g) or more

1/4 inch (6 mm)

1/ Thickness measurements not applicable within 1/4 inch (6 mm) of edge.

II. MATERIAL REQUIREMENTS
To be in full compliance with this specification, all product offered by the manufacturer shall comply with the following material requirements and the individual item descriptions. For

4

USDA, MGCB-certification, all product shall be evaluated in the fresh state in accordance with the IMPS QUALITY ASSURANCE PROVISIONS.
Variety meats and edible by-products shall be thoroughly cleaned, drained, and, unless otherwise specified, trimmed to be practically free (minimum 75 percent lean exposed) of surface fat. Any exposed blood vessels shall be trimmed even with the lean. The finished product shall show no evidence of freezing, defrosting, or mishandling, and be free of any "off" or foreign odors. Kidneys with a strong urinous odor are not acceptable.
Livers, tongue, and hearts shall be compact, thick, short in relation to their width, plump, and practically free of ragged edges, gall bladder, blood clots, bruises, or any other condition which will negatively affect the usability of the finished item.
Liver which has been "tipped" by removing a thin strip of meat from the tip of the left lobe to allow excess blood to drain shall be acceptable. Hearts which have been scored for Food Safety Inspection Service (FSIS) purposes shall be considered as acceptable. However, excessive scoring which negatively affects the slicing of the heart for any reason shall not be acceptable.
Sliced items shall be practically free of sawdust and, unless otherwise specified, be layer packed with waxed or plastic separators between the layers. Broken slices are not acceptable.
CUTTING REQUIREMENTS
Unless otherwise specified in the individual item descriptions, all cuts shall be made in a straight line approximately perpendicular to the outer "skin" surface.
TRIMMING REQUIREMENTS
Cuts which have been excessively trimmed in order to meet specified weights, or which do not meet specification requirements for any reason, are not acceptable.
5

III. DETAILED REQUIREMENTS
Item No. 701 - Beef Liver - The color of beef liver may range from light brown, with reddish shades predominating, to dark brown. Livers with a blue or black color are not acceptable. Livers shall have the heavy connective tissue removed. The large blood vessel, lymph nodes, and ducts lying along the liver wall shall be trimmed even with the surface. Livers shall be practically free of scores and hook marks.
Item No. 702 - Beef Liver, Sliced (Frozen) - Sliced beef liver shall be prepared from Beef Liver - Item No. 701-sliced end to end. Liver slices shall be sliced approximately 5/16-inch thick and at least moderately uniform in weight. For portion sizes of four (4) or less to the pound, the total number of individual portions per 10-pound-unit shall vary not more than plus or minus two (2) from the number per pound specified multiplied by 10. (For example, if the number per pound specified is four (4) to the pound, then 4 x 10 = 40 portions. Therefore, with the permitted tolerance of plus or minus 2 from 40, an acceptable 10-pound-unit could have from 38 to 42 individual portions.) For portion sizes of five (5) or more to the pound, the total number of individual portions per 10-pound-unit shall vary not more than plus or minus three (3) from the number per pound specified multiplied by 10. Product to be sliced may be molded, frozen, and tempered (but not thawed) to facilitate the slicing process.
Unless otherwise specified by the purchaser, practically all of the "skin" (capsula fibrosa), except for the small pieces along the edges and in the crease of the small (caudate) lobe, shall be removed. Other weight ranges, portion thicknesses and slice tolerances may be specified by the purchaser.
Item No. 703 - Beef Liver, Portion-Cut (Frozen) - The small (caudate) lobe and skin shall be removed and excluded. Product to be sliced may be molded, frozen, and tempered (but not thawed) to facilitate the slicing process.
Item No. 704 - Calf Liver - The color of calf liver may range from tan to light brown, with reddish shades predominating. Livers shall have the heavy connective tissue removed. The large blood vessel, lymph nodes and ducts lying along the liver wall shall be trimmed even with the surface.
Item No. 705 - Calf Liver, Sliced (Frozen) - Sliced calf liver shall be prepared from Calf Liver - Item No. 704-sliced end to end. Liver slices shall be within 0.3- to 0.5-inch in thickness and sliced at the weight range specified by the purchaser. For portion sizes of four (4) or less to the pound, the total number of individual portions per 10 pound unit shall vary not more than plus or minus 3 from the number per pound specified multiplied by 10. (For example, if the number per pound specified is 6 to the pound, then 6 x 10 = 60 portions. Therefore, with the permitted tolerance of plus or minus 3 from 60, an acceptable 10-pound unit could have from 57 to 63 individual portions.) Calf liver shall not be skinned. Product to be sliced may be molded, frozen, and
6

tempered (but not thawed) to facilitate the slicing process.
Item No. 707 - Veal Liver - The color of veal liver may range from light reddish tan to tan. Livers shall have the heavy connective tissue removed. The large blood vessel, lymph nodes, and ducts lying along the liver wall shall be trimmed even with the surface. Veal liver shall not be skinned.
Item No. 708 - Veal Liver, Sliced (Frozen) - Sliced veal liver shall be prepared from Veal Liver - Item No. 707 sliced end to end. Liver slices shall be within 0.3 to 0.5 inch in thickness and sliced at the weight range specified by the purchaser. The total number of individual portions per 10-pound-unit shall vary no more than plus or minus 3 from the number per pound specified multiplied by 10. (For example, if the number per pound specified is 6 to the pound, then 6 x 10 = 60 portions. Therefore, with the permitted tolerance of plus or minus 3 from 60, an acceptable 10-pound-unit could have from 57 to 63 individual portions.) Veal liver shall not be skinned. Product to be sliced may be molded, frozen, and tempered (but not thawed) to facilitate the slicing process.
Item No. 710 - Pork Liver - The color of pork liver may range from light reddish brown to very dark brown (not bluish or black), with reddish shades predominating. Livers shall have the heavy connective tissue removed. The large blood vessel, lymph nodes, and ducts lying along the liver wall trimmed even with the surface.
Item No. 713 - Lamb Liver - The color of lamb liver may range from light medium tan to medium brown, with reddish shades predominating. Livers shall have the heavy connective tissue removed. The large blood vessel, lymph nodes, and ducts lying along the liver wall shall be trimmed even with the surface.
Item No. 715 - Veal Sweetbreads - This item consists of the thymus glands from the neck region adjacent to the trachea. Sweetbreads are pinkish in color and shall be practically free of fat and lean. At the purchaser's option, the sweetbreads shall be blanched to remove the covering capsule and firm the tissue.
7

Item No. 716 - Beef Tongue, Short Cut - The beef tongue shall be well-trimmed with the tongue root smoothly removed at the base (thick) end, immediately behind the base of the hyoid (U shaped) bones. Practically all glandular tissue and all of the trachea (windpipe) shall be removed and excluded. The hyoid bones and the epiglottis (soft palate) may be left on the tongue. Major blood vessels at the base of the tongue may remain, however, they shall be trimmed even with the surface. Also, the tongue shall be free from discoloration except for natural pigmentation. The natural pigmentation of the tongue shall be predominantly white to light grey. Tongues which have had a more than a minor amount of the tip end removed are not acceptable. Purchasers may specify that the tongues be white in color without patches of black pigmentation.
Item No. 717 - Tongue, Swiss Cut - The Swiss Cut tongue, shall be as described in Item No. 716, except that all bone, glands, muscular root and base muscles shall be removed. (The muscular root may remain attached if specified by the purchaser.) The remaining "blade" portion of the tongue shall be practically free of fat. Purchasers may specify that the tongues be white in color without patches of black pigmentation. Species desired (BEEF or PORK) shall be specified by the purchaser.
Item No. 720 - Beef Heart, Trimmed - A beef heart shall have the "heart-cap" (auricles, arteries, and gristly material) and bone (os cardis) removed. Hearts shall be trimmed practically free (minimum 75 percent lean exposed) of fat and shall not have been excessively scored.
Item No. 721 - Beef Oxtail, Trimmed - The tail is removed from the carcass at the juncture of the second and third coccygeal vertebrae. Unless otherwise specified by the purchaser the posterior end of the tail shall be "tipped" to remove two to three coccygeal vertebrae and surface fat shall be trimmed to an average 0.25 inch (0.5 inch maximum at any point.) Purchasers may specify that the tails be delivered whole or disjointed.
Item No. 722 - Kidney - The whole organ shall be utilized except that the blood vessels, pizzle cord, and ureter shall be trimmed even with the surface of the kidney. The capsule membrane surrounding the kidney shall be removed. Species desired (BEEF, PORK or LAMB) shall be specified by the purchaser.
Item No. 723 - Cheek Meat - Cheek meat is the group of muscles lying external to the upper and lower jaw bones including the mouth lining (membrane) and all connective tissue extending from the lip portion of the mouth back. Cheek meat shall be practically free of lip material, lymph nodes, and salivary glands. The analytical fat content shall be as specified by the purchas-
8

er. Species desired (BEEF or PORK) shall be specified by the purchaser. Item No. 724 - Head Meat - Head meat is a group of muscle tissue appearing on both the head and the tongue. The tongue muscles included are the elongated muscle attached to the base of the tongue extending to the neck. The head muscles included are snout and eye meat, the temporal muscle, muscle tissue located at the base of the occipital, and the muscle located on the top of the crown extending to the ears. Head meat shall be practically free of lymph nodes and salivary glands. The analytical fat content shall be as specified by the purchaser. Species desired (BEEF or PORK) shall be specified by the purchaser.
Item No. 725 - Brains - The entire brain shall be utilized. The spinal cord shall be separated directly posterior to the pons. The brain shall be bright pink in color and trimmed practically free of fat. Species desired (BEEF, PORK or LAMB) shall be specified by the purchaser.
Item No. 726 - Beef Tripe, Scalded, Bleached (Denuded) - The paunch with or without the "honeycomb" reticulum shall be scalded and washed absolutely free of any foreign material and bleached with an FSIS approved bleaching solution. The color may range from white to a light pale yellow. The dark internal lining shall be removed.
Item No. 727 - Beef Tripe, Honeycomb, Bleached - The "honeycomb" reticulum shall be removed from the paunch by cutting along the seam connecting the two sections of the stomach. The dark internal lining shall be removed and the tripe shall be scalded and bleached to a creamy white color.
Item No. 728 - Pork Chitterlings - Chitterlings are comprised of the hog's large intestine and may include the bung. Chitterlings may be slit or whole (as specified), free of holes and a pinkish beige color. Purchasers may request chitterlings to be cut into specified lengths.
Item No. 729 - Pork Stomach (Maws), Scalded - The pork stomach shall be scalded to remove the mucosa lining and washed absolutely free of any foreign material. The color may range from white to a light pale yellow.
9

Item No. 731 - Edible Tallow - Edible tallow shall conform to the following American Fats and Oils Association (AFOA) standards. The laboratory sample size shall be 1 quart. Titre minimum - 41.0 Free Fatty Acids (FFA) maximum - 0.75 Color (FAC) maximum - 3 Moisture, Impurities, Unsaponifiable matter (MIU) - Moisture 0.20 percent maximum, insoluble impurities 0.05 percent maximum. Item No. 732 - Lard (Edible) - Edible lard shall conform to the following AFOA standards. The laboratory sample size shall be 1 quart. Titre minimum - 38.0 Free Fatty Acids (FFA) maximum - 0.50 Color (FAC) maximum - Lovibond color 5 1/4 inch cell - max 1.5 red. Lard peroxide value 4.0 ME/K maximum. Moisture, Impurities, Unsaponifiable matter (MIU) - Moisture 0.20 percent maximum, insoluble impurities 0.05 percent maximum.
10

DEFECT TABLE 700 A

The following defects are applicable to variety meats and edible by-products except Item No. 731 and 732. A sample unit shall be one cut or portion item as applicable. For sliced liver Items No. 702, 705, and 708, a sample unit shall be 10 pounds. For Item No. 723, and 724 the sample size shall be 0.5 pound.

100

Liver slice not practically

free of sawdust.

101

Bone or cartilage measuring

0.5 inch or more in any

dimension.

at right angles to each other.)
210 Dark internal lining exceeds an area more than 1 sq. inch. (Item No. 715, 715A, 729)

201 Bone or cartilage measuring less than 0.5 inch but more than 0.3 inch in any dimension.

103

Presence of broken slice.

(Two or more separate

pieces.)

104

Color not as specified.

105

Item, exceeds specified fat

requirement.

106

Heart has been excessively

scored affecting slicing.

107

Cheek meat and head meat not

practically free of lip

material, lymph nodes, and

salivary glands. (Score only

once per sample unit)

202 Bruise 1.0 inch or more in any dimension.

203 Bloodclot 1.0 inch or more in any dimension.

204 Item fails to meet specified weight range.

205 Weight of portion cut not within tolerance permitted. (Item No. 703)

206 liver skin greater than 1.0 inch in one dimension and 0.2 inch in a second dimension. (When measured at right angles to each other.) (Item 703)

207 Thickness uniformity of portion cut not within tolerance.

208 Thickness of portion cut varies more than tolerance.

209 Presence of blood vessel measuring 0.5 inch or more in one dimension and 0.2 inch or more in a second dimension. (When measured

IMPS QA TABLE 700-1

211 Heavy connective tissue exceeding an area of 1.0 sq. inch.
212 Capsule membrane surrounding the kidney exceeding an area of 1.0 sq. inch.
213 Pizzle cord and/or ureter exceeding 0.5 inch or more from the surface of the kidney.
214 Posterior end of the tail not "tipped" to remove two to three coccygeal vertebrae. (Item No. 721)

along the liver wall not trimmed even with the surface.
219 More than a minor amount of the tip end of the tongue or liver has been removed.
220 More than 0.5 sq. inch of dehydration or freezer burn.
221 Presence of score more than 0.5 inch in depth at deepest point, and when depth is multiplied by the length, is greater than 2. (Applicable only to liver, tongue, and kidney items.)

215 Evidence of more than a minor amount of "heart-cap" remaining (auricles, arteries, and gristly material.) (Item No. 720)
216 More than a minor amount of glandular material or tongue root remaining. (Item No. 716 and 717)

222 Spinal cord extends more than 0.5 inch posterior to pons. (Item No. 725)
223 Base muscle of the tongue not smoothly removed. (Item No. 717)
224 Item not practically free of holes or hook marks.

217 Trachea (windpipe) measuring 0.5 inch or more in length.

218 Lymph nodes and ducts lying Unless otherwise specified by the purchaser, the AQL's in TABLE I shall be used for all of the items listed except sliced or portion items. The accept (AC) and reject (RE) criteria for the respective AQL's are within TABLE I-A. TABLE I-B shall be used for examination items which have been rejected and reworked.

Unless otherwise specified by the purchaser, the AQL in TABLE II shall be used for sliced and portion cut items. The accept (AC) and reject (RE) criteria for the respective AQL are within TABLE II-A. TABLE II-B shall be used for examination of sliced or portion cut items which have been rejected and reworked.

IMPS QA TABLE 700-1

